Make a Fist:
Hand and finger exercises can help strengthen your hands and fingers, increase your range of motion, and give you pain relief. Stretch only until you feel tightness. You shouldn't feel pain. Start with this simple stretch:
	Make a gentle fist, wrapping your thumb across your fingers.
	Hold for 30 to 60 seconds. Release and spread your fingers wide.
	Repeat with both hands at least four times.

Finger Stretch:
Try this stretch to help with pain relief and to improve the range of motion in your hands:
	Place your hand palm-down on a table or other flat surface.
	Gently straighten your fingers as flat as you can against the surface without forcing your joints.
	Hold for 30 to 60 seconds and then release.
	Repeat at least four times with each hand.

Finger Lift:
Use this exercise to help increase the range of motion and flexibility in your fingers.
	Place your hand flat, palm down, on a table or other surface.
	Gently lift one finger at a time off of the table and then lower it.
	You can also lift all your fingers and thumb at once, and then lower.
	Repeat eight to 12 times on each hand.

Thumb Stretches:
Try these two stretches for your thumb joints:
	Hold your hand out, palm facing you. Gently bend the tip of your thumb down toward the base of your index finger. Hold for 30 to 60 seconds. Release and repeat four times.
	Hold your hand out, palm facing you. Gently stretch your thumb across your palm using just your lower thumb joint. Hold for 30 to 60 seconds. Release and repeat four times.

The Stimulating Breath (also called the Bellows Breath):
The Stimulating Breath is adapted from a yogic breathing technique. Its aim is to raise vital energy and increase alertness.
	Inhale and exhale rapidly through your nose, keeping your mouth closed but relaxed. Your breaths in and out should be equal in duration, but as short as possible. This is a noisy breathing exercise.
	Try for three in-and-out breath cycles per second. This produces a quick movement of the diaphragm, suggesting a bellows. Breathe normally after each cycle.
	Do not do for more than 15 seconds on your first try. Each time you practice the Stimulating Breath, you can increase your time by five seconds or so, until you reach a full minute.

Deep Breathing:
The key to deep breathing is to breathe deeply from the abdomen, getting as much fresh air as possible in your lungs. When you take deep breaths from the abdomen, rather than shallow breaths from your upper chest, you inhale more oxygen. The more oxygen you get, the less tense, short of breath, and anxious you feel.
	Sit comfortably with your back straight. Put one hand on your chest and the other on your stomach.
	Breathe in through your nose. The hand on your stomach should rise. The hand on your chest should move very little.
	Exhale through your mouth, pushing out as much air as you can while contracting your abdominal muscles. The hand on your stomach should move in as you exhale, but your other hand should move very little.
	Continue to breathe in through your nose and out through your mouth. Try to inhale enough so that your lower abdomen rises and falls. Count slowly as you exhale.

The 4-7-8 (or Relaxing Breath) Exercise:
This exercise is utterly simple, takes almost no time, requires no equipment and can be done anywhere. Although you can do the exercise in any position, sit with your back straight while learning the exercise. Place the tip of your tongue against the ridge of tissue just behind your upper front teeth, and keep it there through the entire exercise. You will be exhaling through your mouth around your tongue; try pursing your lips slightly if this seems awkward.
	Exhale completely through your mouth, making a whoosh sound.
	Close your mouth and inhale quietly through your nose to a mental count of four.
	Hold your breath for a count of seven.
	Exhale completely through your mouth, making a whoosh sound to a count of eight.
	This is one breath. Now inhale again and repeat the cycle three more times for a total of four breaths.
